docs/source/index.rst, before:

.. MR-link and genome_integration documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Tue May 28 18:10:10 2019.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

MR-link and genome_integration
==========================================================

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Contents:

   Introduction
   about_mr_link
   simulation_for_mr_link
   about_genome_integration.md

   modules/variants
   modules/samples
   modules/gene_regions
   modules/association
   modules/causal_inference
   modules/simulate_mr
   modules/resources
   modules/utils


Introduction
------------

This package contains MR-link, a Mendelian randomization (MR) method that efficiently identifies causal relationships
between gene expression and complex traits, implicitly correcting for unobserved pleiotropy even if there is only as
single instrumental variable available.

Structure of the package
-------------------------
``genome_integration`` is the library and ``./mr_link/`` has the programs for an implementation of MR-link.

Please revisit to read it in our upcoming publication.


Requirements
--------------------
Everything was tested on Ubuntu 18.04, other flavors of linux should also work as well likely also macOS

Requirements are: Python >= 3.6
with the following packages:
numpy, scipy, sklearn, statsmodels, requests (for `enrichr` api), bitarray and plinkio (used as a reference).

Please make sure that `gcta64` and `plink` (1.9) should be in your PATH as the subprocess module will directly refer to them.

* `Download GCTA <http://cnsgenomics.com/software/gcta/#Download>`_

* `Download plink <https://www.cog-genomics.org/plink2/>`_

If you want to check if they are in your path, try: `which plink` and `which gcta64`


installation
------------
If GCTA and plink are in your ``$PATH``, you can install the genome_integration library with the command in
the downloaded path

   python3 setup.py build install test

After which you can run MR-link, details of which are on the MR-link page.

Commit message:

Made the cross reference between github and readthedocs

docs/source/index.rst, after:

.. MR-link and genome_integration documentation master file, created by
   sphinx-quickstart on Tue May 28 18:10:10 2019.
   You can adapt this file completely to your liking, but it should at least
   contain the root `toctree` directive.

MR-link and genome_integration
==========================================================

.. toctree::
   :maxdepth: 1
   :caption: Contents:

   Introduction
   about_mr_link
   simulation_for_mr_link
   about_genome_integration.md

   modules/variants
   modules/samples
   modules/gene_regions
   modules/association
   modules/causal_inference
   modules/simulate_mr
   modules/resources
   modules/utils


Introduction
------------

This package contains MR-link, a Mendelian randomization (MR) method that efficiently identifies causal relationships
between gene expression and complex traits, implicitly correcting for unobserved pleiotropy even if there is only as
single instrumental variable available.

The source code of the package can be found at `github <https://github.com/adriaan-vd-graaf/genome_integration>`_

Structure of the package
-------------------------
``genome_integration`` is the library and ``./mr_link/`` has the programs for an implementation of MR-link.

Please revisit to read it in our upcoming publication.


Requirements
--------------------
Everything was tested on Ubuntu 18.04, other flavors of linux should also work as well, likely also macOS

Requirements are: Python >= 3.6
with the following packages:
numpy, scipy, sklearn, statsmodels, requests (for `enrichr` api), bitarray and plinkio (used as a reference).

Please make sure that `gcta64` and `plink` (1.9) should be in your PATH as the subprocess module will directly refer to them.

* `Download GCTA <http://cnsgenomics.com/software/gcta/#Download>`_

* `Download plink <https://www.cog-genomics.org/plink2/>`_

If you want to check if they are in your path, try: `which plink` and `which gcta64`


installation
------------
If GCTA and plink are in your ``$PATH``, you can install the genome_integration library with the command in
the downloaded path

   python3 setup.py build install test

After which you can run MR-link, details of which are on the MR-link page.
